
APPLICATION DEADLINES
15 June
for the
winter semester
(end of September - end of
                            February)
15 November
of the previous year for the
summer semester
(beginning of March - mid July)
Non-EU students are advised to send their applications before the deadline due to the lengthy
                        visa procedure.
Please send the application documents to
international(at)htw-dresden.de
.
NECESSARY DOCUMENTS
To be admitted at HTWD as an exchange student, you must be nominated by your home university.
                        After the nomination by your home university (name/first name/email address/study
                        period/faculty/course of study by e-mail to
international(at)htw-dresden.de
), you can apply for a study
                        visit at HTWD using a simplified procedure. The following application documents are required:
Application
                                for admission to studies (form)
(signed by you and your home university
                            coordinator)
(Online) Learning Agreement
(your course selection approved and signed
                            by your and your home university coordinator)
Resume/CV
(in English or German)
Transcript of Records
(overview of your grades, issued by your home
                            university, in English or German)
Proof of language proficiency
(proof of the language you will be
                            studying in, English and/or German at level B1/B2)
Signed request for HTW login
(the document will be send to you via email)
up-to-date passport photo
(for your HTWD student ID card, minimum size of
                            180x240 pixels in JPEG, PNG or GIF format, view from the front, neutral background)
copy of passport or ID
Proof of a valid study visa (can be submitted later upon entry)
Please have the International Office or the ERASMUS university coordinator of your home
                        university confirm your study visit at HTWD on the application form for admission (page 2).
                        Without this confirmation no admission can take place.
LETTER OF ADMISSION
Once you have send us your application and after approval of your responsible academic
                        coordinator in our university, we will issue you a letter of admission. Please understand
                        that this procedure might take some time. With this letter of admission you can apply for a
                        study visa at the German Embassy in your home country (if necessary).
If you have any questions regarding your application, please contact
international(at)htw-dresden.de
by e-mail.
If you have any subject-related/content-related questions in preparation for your study visit
                        at HTWD (Learning Agreement), please contact the responsible academic coordinator at
                        your home university or the responsible academic coordinator at HTWD.
An overview of
English taught courses
can be found here:
https://www.htw-dresden.de/en/international/coming-to-htw-dresden/exchange-programmes/modules-in-english
The
Faculty of Business Administration
offers a wide range of English
                        taught courses from which you can choose. An overview of the courses can be found on the
                        website of the
Faculty of Business Administration
. Please note that the courses of the
                        Faculty of Business Administration are only accessible for exchange students with whom the home
                        university has an exchange agreement with.
Courses for
ALL exchange students
:
German/English/French/Spanish language course (CEF-Level A1 to CEF Level C1, 3-5 ECTS)
“Introduction to German culture” (module number
Z007
, 2 ECTS, NO GRADE, only passed/failed, taught in English)
“Introduction to Business in Germany” (ONLY in winter semester!, module number
W002
, 5 ECTS, taught in English)
“Introduction to Business Simulation Game” (module number
W005
, 3 ECTS, NO GRADE, only passed/failed, taught in English)
“Intercultural Communication” (taught in GERMAN in summer semester!,
                            module number
Z011
, 5 ECTS, NO GRADE, only passed/failed)
“Intercultural Communication” (taught in ENGLISH in winter semester!,
                            module number
Z013
, 5 ECTS)
In our module database "
Modulux
" you will find more information about the modules as well as
                        the course content. Please use the filter function and enter the module numbers.
Modules in German language
can also be viewed via the module database "
Modulux
". Go to the
modules
and filter by "Faculty" or "Assignment to
                        curriculum".
ACADEMIC COORDINATOR
As an exchange student you will receive an Academic Coordinator (supervising professor of
                        the responsible faculty) for the duration of your study stay at the HTWD, who will support you
                        in all academic matters. With your Academic Coordinator you can clarify all questions
                        concerning the planned study programme at the HTWD (Learning Agreement), the registration and
                        participation in examinations and the examination results (Transcript of Records) as well as
                        subject-specific questions. During the Welcome Week you will get to know your
                        Academic Coordinator in a personal meeting.
LEARNING AGREEMENT
In order to be admitted as an exchange student at HTWD, you need a Learning Agreement, in which
                        you list the courses you would like to attend at our university.
Starting with the academic year 2022/23, all Erasmus+ exchange students need to create
                            the Learning Agreement completely digitally via
https://learning-agreement.eu
/ as Online Learning Agreement
                            (OLA).
You can find instructions on how to do this here:
Online Learning Agreement
.
Exchange students who will not be studying at HTWD through Erasmus+, please fill out this
template
.
The Learning Agreement is a contract between you, your home university and the HTWD. The Learning
                        Agreement specifies which academic achievements you wish to achieve and to what extent.
You should discuss the choice of course with your supervisor at your home university and clarify
                        in advance which courses are recognised at your home university or not. The Learning Agreement
                        must be signed by you, your supervisor at your home university and the responsible
                        Academic Coordinator at HTWD.
If at the beginning of your studies at HTWD there are changes to your chosen courses, please
                        submit the change to the International Office. You, your home university and your
                        Academic Coordinator at HTW Dresden must sign the changed Learning Agreement.
STUDY SCHEDULE
As an exchange student, we cannot provide you with a ready-made timetable. Unlike students at the
                        HTWD, you have to create your own timetable. Your Academic Coordinator will help you to
                        choose the courses (if you need to change your Learning Agreement) and how to put together the
                        timetable during the first weeks of your study visit.
Academic year schedules and academic year calendars ("Studienjahresablaufplan") can be found
                        under "Links and documents" on the
"My study"
page.
Winter semester 2024/25
Welcome Week: 23
rd
of September 2024 until 28
th
of September 2024
Lecture period: 30
th
of September 2024 until 25
th
of January 2025
Examination period: 27
th
of January 2025 until 15
th
of February 2025
Summer semester 2025
Welcome Week: 10th of March till 15th of March 2025
Lecture period: 17th of March till 5th of July 2025
Examination period: 07th of July till 26th of July 2025
Wintersemester 2025/26
Welcome Week: 29th of September 2025 until 04th of October 2025
Lecture period: 06th of October 2025 until 31st of January 2026
Examination period: 02nd of February 2026 until 21st of February 2026
Language is the key to the culture and society of any country. For everyday life and leisure time
                        in Dresden it is very helpful to pick up a basic knowledge of German. The German language is
                        considered to be somewhat difficult and certainly requiring motivation to learn in the
                        beginning. The reward, however, is that it will smoothen the way into your new environment.
LANGUAGE REQUIREMENTS
Students who wish to attend regular courses at the HTW in German and/or English require good to
                        very good
German and/or English language skills (B1/B2)
.
FREE LANGUAGE COURSES
The Language Center of HTWD offers free language
                        courses in "German as a Foreign Language (DaF)", English, French and Spanish in the winter and
                        summer semesters. The levels of the language courses are defined on the basis of the Common
                        European Framework of Reference for Languages (A1, A2, B1, B2, C1, C2). If you successfully
                        complete one of these language courses, you can earn ECTS credits for it.
In order to take a language course, it is essential that you attend the information sessions
                        during the Welcome Week. You will receive further information on this shortly before the start
                        of the Welcome Week.
You can find more information on the homepage of the
Language Center
.
LANGUAGE COURSES FROM TUDIAS
If you would like to prepare yourself
                        linguistically before the start of the semester, we recommend language courses offered by
TUDIAS
in downtown Dresden (with fees).
Students are subject to
compulsory health insurance
to be able
                        to study in Germany. This means that you can only enroll if you can prove that you have such
                        health insurance. For all students from outside EU or EEA countries we recommend to take out a
                        German health insurance  with a statutory health insurance company (e.g.
AOK Plus
,
Techniker Krankenkasse
,
Barmer
...)
                        before your come to Dresden.
--> Students from European Union or EEA countries, Switzerland, Bosnia and
                            Herzegovina, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia, Turkey, Tunisia or the United
                            Kingdom
Students who are
statutorily insured in these countries
prove their statutory
                        health insurance by showing their
European Health Insurance Card
(EHIC), Global Health Insurance
                        Card (from the UK) or Eligibility (from a treaty country). You are therefore already insured
                        through your home country and do not have to take out additional health insurance in Germany.
                        Please note that your insurance may not cover all costs in Germany. You should therefore make
                        sure that you know exactly which benefits you are entitled to in Germany before you enter the
                        country. You must contact a German statutory health insurance provider and request confirmation
                        that you hold statutory health insurance in your home country and that your health
                        insurance is valid in Germany. Only then you are able to use your health insurance from your
                        home country in Germany and can get your HTW student ID card!
--> Students from other countries must obtain a statutory or private health insurance in
                        Germany.
Statutory health insurance:
Students under the age of 30 may obtain insurance
                        from any German statutory health insurance provider (e.g.
AOK Plus
,
Techniker Krankenkasse
,
Barmer
....) at
                        a student rate (currently about 130 Euro for health and long-term care care insurance), which
                        includes all legally mandated benefits. To register with a statutory health insurance
                        provider, you will need your passport and Letter of Admission from HTW Dresden
                        (Zulassungsbescheid). You can secure insurance for the intended period of study from your home
                        country, before arriving in Germany. You do not need an address in Germany or a certificate of
                        enrolment from the university! Your Letter of Admission is sufficient for registration with a
                        statutory health insurance.
For Enrollment: The health insurance company will transmit the information about your
                            insurance status electronically to HTW Dresden. It is not necessary to submit health
                            insurance documents to us by conventional mail.
Private health insurance:
The following applies to students under the age
                        of 30: If you obtain a private health insurance in Germany or wish to bring a policy from your
                        home country, you must nonetheless contact a German statutory health insurance provider and
                        obtain an exemption from the statutory health insurance obligation.
You can also do
                            this online before you arrive in Dresden, e.g. with
Techniker
                                Krankenkasse
.
The exemption cannot be revoked; it is
                        valid for the entire duration of your university studies. If you have private health
                        insurance, you will have to pay in advance for all medical services and medication in Germany
                        and then request reimbursement from your health insurance provider in your home country. If you
                        are privately insured, you cannot switch to a statutory health insurance for the duration of
                        your studies.
For Enrollment: A copy of your private health insurance is not sufficient! Students under
                            the age of 30 must contact a German statutory health insurance provider and obtain an
                            exemption from the statutory health insurance obligation. The health insurance company will
                            transmit the information about your insurance status electronically to HTW Dresden.
When issuing the residence permit (only non EU-students), the
                        Dresden Immigration Office also checks whether your private health insurance
                        is sufficient for the stay in Germany and corresponds to the scope of a statutory health
                        insurance in Germany.
Information on health insurance in Germany can also be found on the
DAAD
website.
Please also check before you start your study visit whether you have sufficient
private
                            insurance in the event of a claim
(e.g. in the case of damage to property or
                        personal injury caused by you to third parties, accidents or theft).
After you receive your letter of admission from HTWD you should check the immigration formalities
                        available from the
Federal Foreign Office
.
Information is also available from
                        the German missions in your home country. Leave enough time to complete all the necessary steps,
                        such as obtaining a passport and arranging insurance and the permits, before leaving your home
                        country.
EXCHANGE STUDENTS FROM EU COUNTRIES
If you are an EU citizen, no visa is required to enter or to study in Germany. A valid
                        passport or identity card is sufficient.
EXCHANGE STUDENTS FROM OTHER COUNTRIES (NON-EU)
As a rule, all other international exchange students require a
student
                            visa
– especially if they want to stay in Germany for more than three months.
                        You will need to apply for the necessary visa at the German embassy in your home country
                        before your come to Germany. So reserve enough time - several weeks/month - for the process! For
                        a student visa, you need admission to study and proof of sufficient financial means.
This does not apply to citizens from the following countries:
Andorra, Australia,
                            Brazil, El Salvador, Great Britain and Honduras, Iceland, Israel, Japan,
                            Canada,
the
Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, Monaco, New
                            Zealand, Northern Ireland, Norway, San Marino, Switzerland
and
                        the
USA
. Exchange students from these countries only need a residence
                        permit for study purposes. You have to apply for this residence permit at the Dresden
                        Immigration Office within three months after entry in Germany.
VISA REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-EU STUDENTS ENROLLED AT A UNIVERSITY IN THE EU
Non-EU students who are enrolled at a university in an EU country no longer necessarily
                        require a German residence permit if they plan to stay in Germany for study purposes for less
                        than 360 days. This is covered by EU Directive 2016/801, the so-called
REST Directive for researchers and students
.
As a host university, we have to submit an application for mobility to the Federal Office for
                        Migration and Refugees (BAMF), which must be approved before you arrive. Full notification
                        to BAMF absolutely must be received no later than 30 days prior to your entering Germany.
The notification which HTW Dresden sends to the Federal Office must comprise the following
                        documents:
Residence permit for study purposes from the first EU Member State (must be valid for the
                            entire duration of stay in Germany)
Recognised, valid passport
Declaration on securing livelihood (According to § 2 Abs. 3 Satz 5 AufenthG, the livelihood
                            of students is considered secured if they have a monthly amount equal to the current BAföG
                            maximum rate of 992 EUR/month, the national standard that defines the absolute minimum of
                            expenses that a student needs to cover for an appropriate standard of living.)
Declaration of sufficient health insurance cover (at least 30.000 EUR sum insured)
If you are planning a stay for study purposes of more than 360 days, then you will be required to
                        apply for a visa.
Further information can be found on the website from the
Federal Office for Migration and Refugees
.
GENERAL
Find out in good time about the entry requirements that apply to your country. You can find an
                        overview of visa requirements/exemptions for entry into Germany on the website of the
Federal Foreign Office
.
Never enter on a tourist visa! A tourist visa does not entitle you to study, nor can it
                            be converted into a residence permit for study purposes after you have entered
                            Germany.
STUDENT RESIDENCE
During your stay at HTWD you can live in a student residence of the Studentenwerk Dresden (rental
                        period at least 4 months). You can register directly at the Studentenwerk Dresden using the
                        online application procedure. To apply, you need a copy of the admission letter from HTW
                        Dresden. Please contact the Studentenwerk Dresden directly with any questions
                        concerning halls of residence.
Detailed information on the various accommodation options and the application form (online
                        application procedure) can be found at:
https://www.studentenwerk-dresden.de/english/wohnen/wohnheimkatalog/
If you arrive outside the arrival times specified by the Studentenwerk Dresden, we recommend that
                        you stay the first night at the
International Guest House
of the Studentenwerk Dresden,
                        a hotel or youth hostel in Dresden. The A&O Hostel/Hotel near the HTW Dresden is only 500 m
                        away from the main train station.
LIVING COMMUNITY OUTSIDE OF THE STUDENT RESIDENCE
If you prefer to live in a shared apartment, you can find information in Facebook groups or on
                        the following websites:
wg-gesucht.de
Franklin 20 — privates Wohnheim
ACCOMMODATION IN AN INTERNATIONAL GUESTHOUSE
For study stays of up to 3 months there is the possibility of accommodation in the
International Guest House
of the Studentenwerk Dresden.
                        As the capacity of the International Guest House is limited, you should contact your academic
                        advisor or the International Office of the HTW Dresden in good time.
MORE HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
NP One
(1-3 rooms,
                            completely furnished, minimum rental period of 9 months applies!)
INFORMATION ABOUT "RUNDFUNKBEITRAG"
The "Runfunkbeitrag" is required after hiring a room anywhere in Germany. After receiving a
                        letter from "Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk" (Beitragsservice von ARD, ZDF, Deutschlandradio) you
                        need to pay a legally fixed Licence fee for public-service broadcasting channels with the
                        amount of 18,36 EUR per monthly and per flat. This amount can be shared between
                        the roommates. However, under certain conditions, you can apply for an exemption from the
                        licence fee.
More Information
SEMESTER CONTRIBUTION
There is
no tuition fee
at HTWD, but a
semester contribution
is
                        charged (approx. 301 EUR, as of winter semester 2024/25). The semester contribution includes
                        contributions to the Studentenwerk, the Studentenrat and the
German semester ticket
(available via a cell phone
                        app), which is valid for local public transport throughout Germany.
Exchange students need to pay the semester contribution by bank transfer from their home country
                        before entering the country. This ensures that the HTW student card and HTW-Login (to activate
                        your German semester ticket) can be handed over during the Welcome Week. Please note that a bank
                        transfer takes several working days until it is registered at the HTW Dresden. You will receive
                        an e-mail with the amount of the semester contribution and the exact bank details in good time
                        before the start of the semester.
GENERAL LIVING EXPENSES IN DRESDEN
For living expenses in Dresden, you can expect to spend around 600-800 euros per month, depending
                        on your individual lifestyle.
Please plan on the following
monthly expenses
for your studies in Dresden:
rent 250 EUR on average
living expenses 200 EUR on average
health insurance approx. 130 EUR (if required, applies to non-EU students)
public broadcasting fee 18,36 EUR*
You will also have the following
costs per semester
:
semester contribution (including German semester ticket) 301 EUR (as of
                            winter semester 2024/25).
deposit for the dormitory 300 EUR**
study materials 50 EUR***
residence permit 110 EUR (if required, non-EU students)
* Mandatory payment as soon as you have rented a room somewhere in Germany. After receiving a
                        request from the "Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk" (
contribution service
of ARD, ZDF, Deutschlandradio) a
                        legally fixed contribution for public radio and television has to be paid, amounting to 18,36
                        EUR per month per apartment. This fee is divided by the number of roommates in the apartment.
** The dormitory requires a deposit in the beginning with the first payment, which will be
                        refunded at the end of the contract period if you leave the room clean and without damages.
*** Our university library offers many books and e-books, magazines and online databases for
                        free. You decide which book you want to buy yourself anyway, but you have no obligation to buy
                        books. You can work with our books in the library.
There are several options for your journey to Dresden.
By airplane
Airlines offer daily worldwide connections to and from Dresden. Direct flights to Dresden
                            are available from airports such as Frankfurt am Main, Munich, Stuttgart, Cologne/Bonn,
                            Düsseldorf and Amsterdam.
Dresden Airport
is about 30 minutes by car from the city center and
                            is located directly on the A4 highway.
Deutsche
                                Bahn
trains run regularly between the airport and Dresden's main train station.
The airports of Berlin, Munich and Frankfurt am Main are also easily accessible from
                            Dresden. These cities are connected to Dresden by train and long-distance bus lines.
By train
Intercity and Intercity-Express (IC/ICE) trains operated by
Deutsche Bahn
connect Dresden with almost all major European
                            cities.
Dresden's main train station is located in the center of the city. Numerous regional
                            and suburban train connections link Dresden with the immediate surroundings.
By long-distance bus
A fast, inexpensive and direct connection between Dresden and major cities such as Berlin,
                            Munich, Vienna and Prague is also offered by traveling by long-distance bus from Dresden
                            Central Station (Bayerische Straße, 01069 Dresden) or Dresden-Neustadt Station (Schlesischer
                            Platz, 01099 Dresden).
From here you can use, for example,
FlixBus
bus connections to German and European
                            cities.
By car
You can reach Dresden via the A4 and A17 freeways.
Additional travel information can be found on the following pages:
Campus map
HTW Dresden
Dresden public
                                transport
(Dresdner Verkehrsbetriebe)
City of Dresden - Arrival and Public Transport
WELCOME WEEK
At the beginning of each semester there is a Welcome Week for our new international students
                        one week before the start of the lectures. The week is organized in cooperation with the student
                        organisation
faranto e.V
.
Dates Welcome Week - summer semester 2025
(The program can be found
here
.)
10th of March 2025 until 15th of March 2025
Dates Welcome Week - winter semester 2025/26
29th of September 2025
                        until 04th of October 2025
Exchange students are strongly advised to take part in the Welcome Week.
                        The
Welcome Week includes
, among other things:
an overview of HTWD
campus tour
registration at the International Office
information session on the organisation of your studies and the selection of your
                            courses
support in making appointments with your HTW acadamic coordinator
introduction to the university library
introduction to German and English language courses
opening a bank account (if necessary)
confirmation of a valid health insurance from your home country or conclusion of a German
                            statutory health insurance
help with formalities for the Citizens' Office Dresden ("Bürgerbüro")
Detailed information on the Welcome Week program will be published
on this page
. Please note that the program will be updated on an ongoing
                        basis.
For enrollment as an exchange student at HTW Dresden, the following conditions/documents must be
                        fulfilled:
valid passport or identity card
valid visa for study purposes (if required, applies to non-EU students)
Proof of health insurance recognized in Germany
Payment of the semester contribution
BUDDY PROGRAMME
The association
faranto e.V.
organizes a buddy programme for international exchange
                        students. You will receive further information by e-mail before you start your studies abroad
                        at HTWD.
Instagram:
https://www.instagram.com/farantovereindresden/
Your enrolment takes place during the Welcome Week. All exchange students must
                        enrol upon arrival at the International Office (HTW Dresden, Friedrich-List-Platz 1, 01069
                        Dresden, Z-building, Room Z 232).
For enrollment as an exchange student at HTW Dresden, the following conditions/documents must be
                        fulfilled:
valid passport or identity card
valid visa for study purposes (if required, applies to non-EU
                            students)
Proof of health insurance recognized in Germany
Payment of the semester contribution
Students at HTWD receive a
student card
in the form of a chip card at the
                        beginning of their studies and serves as:
Student ID
library card
Access authorization card for entrance in the university buildings and selected laboratory
                            areas
Furthermore you may receive a discount with your HTWD student card in some places like museums,
                        cinemas and zoos.
Terms and conditions of the German semester ticket ("Deutschlandsemesterticket")
The semester ticket
is only valid in combination with a valid identity document;
is non-transferable and does not permit the transport of additional people; and
does not permit the transport of bicycles or dogs.
The semester ticket is valid
in the winter semester from 01.09. until 28./29.02.;
in the summer semester from 01.03. until 31.08..
The
semester ticket
is primarily provided
digitally
to be
                        accessed on a mobile device.
To do this, you must log in to the following platform using your
                        university login:
Accessing the digital ticket:
[LINK]
The semester ticket is valid within the area of validity according to the
tariff
                            regulations of the Deutschlandticket
.
In short, the ticket is
valid
                            throughout Germany
for
local public transport
(ÖPNV) and local
                        railway transport (SPNV), i.e. for:
Commuter trains (RegionalExpress, RegionalBahn or S-Bahn) in 2nd class
trams
underground trains
city and regional buses
most ferries
bicycle rental
(MOBIbike/nextbike)
The ticket is
not
valid for
intercity
trains (ICE, IC, EC) and
                        for most special transport services.
Detailed information can be found on the StuRa website:
https://www.stura.htw-dresden.de/stura/ref/verwaltung/ticket/geltungsbereich_en
After moving to Dresden you are obliged to register at the local
Citizens’ Office Dresden
(“Bürgerbüro”) within two weeks
                        if you stay
longer than 3 months.
Please make an
appointment
before visiting a Citizens' Office:
Online appointment
.
Without appointment
, all Citizens' Office's (Altstadt, Blasewitz, Cotta,
                        Klotzsche, Leuben, Neustadt, Pieschen, Plauen and Prohlis) will offer the possibility to visit
                        the office
without prior appointment
every
Tuesday and
                            Thursday
. This means that registration can be completed on Tuesdays and Thursdays
                        between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. You can find the addresses of the Citizens' Offices here:
https://www.dresden.de/en/city/anliegen/citizens-offices.php
In order to register your address, you need:
passport or identification card
rental contract
Landlord's certificate/housing confirmation („Wohnungsgeberbescheinigung“, your rental
                            agreement is not sufficient)
Any change of address must be reported to the Citizens' Office. Before you leave Germany you have
                        to deregister and will receive a certificate confirming your deregistration (“Abmeldung”).
Please always do remember to notify all important authorities (HTWD, German health insurance
                        company, etc.) of your new address.
EU citizens
Citizens of the European Union as well as the European Economic Area (Iceland, Liechtenstein and
                        Norway) can work and travel freely throughout Germany and the EU and do not require a permit for
                        long-term stays. All you have to do is register at the Citizens' Office Dresden.
Non-EU citizens
Students from
non-EU countries
who stay longer than three months are obliged to
apply for a residency permit
for academic purposes
at the
Immigration Office Dresden
within the
                            first three months
after entering Germany. This also applies to foreign
                        nationals who are exempt from the entry visa requirement (citizens of Australia, Canada, Israel,
                        Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea or the USA).
Address:
Immigration Office Dresden
, Theaterstrasse
                        13/15, 01067 Dresden
Please make an appointment before visiting the office by sending your first name, surname, date
                        of birth, nationality, date of arrival, entry visa’s expiry date, passport and the reason of
                        your stay. Please use the contact form on the website or via email
                        ("termin.auslaenderbehoerde@dresden.de").
Along with the date and time of your appointment, the office will send you a list of the
                        documents required. Fill in the
residence permit application
beforehand and hand
                        it in at the Immigration Authority together with the
following documents
:
fully completed
application form
administrative charge (110 EUR in cash or ec-cash)
rental agreement (original and copy)
current proof of adequate health insurance (original and copy)
proof of secured livelihood (original and copy), for example scholarship or private savings
certificate of enrollment (enrollment or admission letter of HTW Dresden, with copy)
current biometric photo (not older than 6 months)
current valid/new passport or passport replacement document (with copy)
Visa for study purposes (except USA, Australia, Israel, Japan, Canada, Korea, New Zealand,
                            Switzerland)
The Studentenwerk Dresden offers all students a variety of catering options at a reasonable
                        price. For cashless payment you will receive the
MensaCard Emeal
at the cash desks. You can obtain the MensaCard
                        Emeal for a deposit of 5 EUR and presentation of your HTW student ID as well as your ID
                        card/passport at the cash desks. Information about locations of canteens, cafeterias and
                        menus can be found on the website of the
Studentenwerk Dresden
. The
Mensa "Matrix"
is a 5-minute walk from HTWD.
The
cafeteria "Listig
" is also used by students from HTWD.
                        The cafeteria is situated in the ground floor of the Z-building of HTW Dresden and is open
                        from Monday to Friday 08:30 a.m. until 03:00 p.m. You can buy handmade coffee specialities of
                        the "Dresdner Kaffee- und Kakaorösterei", waffels, pancakes, sandwiches, sweets and different
                        drinks. There are also several vending machines located in the building with a selection of
                        drinks and snacks. In addition, many third-party restaurants can be found nearby the campus.
If you do not have a bank account in EURO currency, it is necessary to open a German bank account
                        to debit the rent. Normally students are exempt from account maintenance fees.
To open an account at a bank, you will need:
passport or national ID card for identification
confirmation of registration (“Meldebestätigung”) from the Resident Registration Office in
                            Dresden
German tax identification number (will be sent by post after registration at the Resident
                            Registration Office in Dresden)
enrolment certificate from HTW Dresden ("Immatrikulationsbescheinigung")
The most common form of a bank account in Germany is a “Girokonto” (giro or check account). Once
                        you have opened a bank account you will receive a debit card, or cash card (“EC-Karte”), which
                        enables you to withdraw cash from the majority of cash machines in Germany and Europe. This is
                        normally free of charge at your own bank’s ATMs and those of the “cash group” or “cash pool”
                        that your bank is affiliated with. Cash machines from other banks will charge you a fee. Many
                        shops allow you to pay for goods and services using the cash card in conjunction with your PIN
                        or signature. Online banking is also available when holding a “Girokonto”.
Lectures in the
summer semester 2025
start on Monday, 17.03.2025 (calendar week
                        12, even week).
Lectures in the
winter semester 2024/25
start on Monday, 30.09.2024.
                        (calendar week 40, even week).
The timetables for the winter semester will be published mid September, for the summer semester
                        in the beginning of March.
The timetables and room schedules for the respective current semester can be found in the link
                        below. The summer semester 2025 starts with the calendar week 12, i.e., with an even week.
                        Please note that changes to the timetables can be made even in the first few weeks of the
                        semester.
https://www.htw-dresden.de/en/studium/im-studium/current-timetable-and-room-planning
In the "Additional courses" section, enter the course code in the first line, e.g. "W002" and
                        select the course in the extra window that appears. Then click "Individual timetable". The
                        course time for the
odd
and even week
will appear.
Faculty of Business Administration:
During the Welcome Week, there is an
                        Information Session on study organization for all exchange students admitted in the
                        Faculty of Business Administration (Bachelor and Master).
All other faculties
: Your academic coordinator will assist you in preparing
                        your timetable during the Welcome Week. Do not worry if the meeting takes place during the
                        first week of the lecture period. You can still attend the lectures you might miss during the
                        first week.
You will receive your personal
HTWD Login
when you enroll at the International
                        Office. With the student IT account, you can log in to student computers, the student web, use
                        the library's resources and log in to your HTWD email account. If someone at HTWD likes to
                        contact you or inform you about something, this is the email address they will use. Therefore,
                        make it a habit to read emails sent to your HTWD email address.
Once you have gained access to your student account at HTWD, you will have access to
                        several
digital tools, systems and programs
                            for studies
. Log in and familiarize yourself with these before the course starts.
HTWD email via groupware
:
https://groupware.htw-dresden.de
Wifi via eduroam:
https://www.htw-dresden.de/en/university/organisation/zid/service-overview-and-instructions/wi-fi-/-wlan/eduroam
Virtual Private Network (VPN):
VPN allows you to access e-books outside the
                        eduroam network of the library and to access your university drive ->
https://www.htw-dresden.de/en/university/organisation/zid/service-overview-and-instructions/virtual-private-network-vpn
If you have
technical issues
, the student
Service Desk
is the
                        central contact point for all inquiries from students regarding of the IT-Services of HTWD.
OPAL and BigBlueButton (BBB):
Most of the teachers use the eLearning
                        platform
OPAL
and the video conferencing system "BigBlueButton" (BBB).
There are some instructions about it on HTWD pages:
https://www.htw-dresden.de/studium/im-studium/e-learning-angebote
.
During the first days of the semester, be sure to log in to OPAL and
enroll in the
                            courses
you will be taking during the semester. Lecturers will upload course
                        materials, exercises, and other information to the electronic course folder. Go to:
https://bildungsportal.sachsen.de/opal/dmz/
and log in with your
                        HTWD student Login (s-number and password).
In OPAL you can change the
language settings
: Login with the s-number and
                        password > On the top right you will see the name > Click on it to get to the settings
                        > Select the tab "Systemeinstellungen". There you can set the language to English. Save.
                        Done.
There are two time options for the 3rd double period to divide up the lunch break. Please refer
                        to your timetable.
....Removed table
Room names comprise a letter (which indicates the location) and three digits (the first digit
                        indicates the floor). Examples: S 325 = seminar building, 3rd floor, seminar room 325 or Z 107 =
                        central building, 1st floor, lecture hall Z 107
Locations:
Z = Central Building, Friedrich‐List‐Platz 1
S = Seminar Building,
                        Friedrich‐List‐Platz 1
N = Teaching Building Naturwissenschaften, Andreas‐Schubert‐Str.
                        10
L = Teaching Building, Schnorrstr. 29
K = Technikum, Uhlandstr. 25
M = Canteen
                        Building, Reichenbachstr 1
A = Office Building, Andreas‐Schubert‐Str. 23
H =
                        Straßenbaulabor (SBL), Schnorrstr. 56
P = Campus Pillnitz
EXAMINATION PERIOD AND EXAMINATION DATES
The examinations at the HTW Dresden usually take place in
February and July
of
                        each year. The exact period can be found in the academic calendar of the respective academic
                        year. If your exams are completed earlier, you can also leave earlier. At the latest
one month before the start of the respective examination section
, the specific
examination dates
will be published. To do this, enter the name of the
                        examiner and press "Suchen".
The following examination types are possible:
oral examination (MP)
written examination (SP)
alternative examination (APL)
APL ("Alternative Prüfungsleistungen") are usually taken during the current semester. APL are
                        tests, presentations, project work, exercises, oral performance tests, etc. The dates are
                        announced by the examiners.
EXAM REGISTRATION
All exchange students must register for the exams. To register for the examinations, please send
                        the current version of your learning agreement to the International Office (
international(at)htw-dresden.de
). You will be informed about the
                        registration period by e-mail. In addition, please inform the responsible professor/teacher of
                        the course about your participation in the examination before the examination.
If you do not register for the exams with your current Learning Agreement, you are not
                            entitled to take part in the exams!
EXAMINATION DEREGISTRATION
►
Deregistration
from the examination is possible without giving reasons up to one
                        week before the examination.
► After the end of the deregistration period, withdrawal from
                        an examination can only be made for good cause, e.g. as a result of illness, on presentation of
                        a
medical certificate
.
If an examination date cannot be attended at short notice due to illness, a medical certificate
                        must be submitted to the
examination office
within 3 working days of the examination. If you do
                        not withdraw from the examination, it will be considered as failed. In the event of failing an
                        exam, the examiner may be contacted to make arrangements for a retake date.
EXAMINATION RESULTS
You can view the examination results in the
QIS portal
after publication until your exmatriculation. Once you
                        are exmatriculated, you will no longer have access to the grades.
GRADING SYSTEM
1,0 - 1,5 = very good
1,6 - 2,5 = good
2,6 - 3,5 = satisfactory
3,6 - 4,0 = sufficient
4,1 - 5,0 = fail
5u.e. = unexcused absence
m.E. = attended
All exchange students receive their Transcript of Records by e-mail as soon as all grades have
                        been reported to the Examination Office by the professors/lecturers.
Please wait until 4 weeks after the official end of the examination period before contacting us
                        about your Transcript of Records.
As long as you are not yet exmatriculated at HTWD, you can view your grades via the
QIS portal
.
HTW Dresden applies the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS).
PROLONGATION OF MATRICULATION
If you wish to stay one more semester at HTWD, please confer with your home university as well as
                        with your Academic Coordinator from HTWD. Please bring the form for prolongation of
                        matriculation to the appointment with your Academic Coordinator. You need to sign as well as
                        your home university and your Academic Coordinator from HTWD. You must also complete a new
                        Learning Agreement. Please hand in the signed
prolongation
                                of matriculation
at the International Office. You will then be issued
                        with a letter of admission for the following semester.
Please remember to
pay the semester contribution
for re-registration within the
                        re-registration period.
PROLONGATION OF STUDY VISA
In most cases, you need to
extent your study visa
(exchange students from non-EU
                        countries) at the Immigration Office if you want to stay longer as planned. Please schedule an
                        appointment via email "
termin.auslaenderbehoerde(at)dresden.de"
and extent your study
                        visa. You need to take your admission letter for the next semester with you. Usually, you get a
                        temporary visa called "Fiktionsbescheinigung" valid for a few month until you get your residency
                        permit ("Aufenthaltstitel"). Please show the "Fiktionsbescheinigung" and/or "Aufenthaltstitel"
                        to the Student Office in order that you can re-register for the next semester.
If you stay at HTWD for longer than one semester, you need to re-register within the
                        re-registration period by paying the semester contribution for the upcoming semester.
PAYMENT INFORMATION
Recipient: Hauptkasse Sachsen
IBAN:
                        DE06860000000086001519
BIC: MARKDEF1860
Bank: Deutsche Bundesbank
The current amount of the semester contribution can be
                                found
here
or on the QIS portal.
1st line purpose:
                        personal payment reference number (SBKZ) for the summer or winter semester
2nd line purpose:
                        matriculation number and name
Please note:
a bank transfer will require up to 6 working days until the money
                        can be registered at HTWD. As soon as the amount has arrived at HTWD, you will be able to
update the stamp on your student ID card with the card printer
.
In case
                        the semester contribution only arrives after the end of the re-registration period, the
                        university charges a late fee of 10,- EUR.
A lack of re-registration in due time may
                            lead to expulsion!
The deadlines for re-registration and the amount of the current semester contribution can be
                        found in the information provided by the
Department
                            of Student Affairs
.
Enrollment certificates can be conveniently printed from home via the QIS-portal.
UNIVERSITY SPORT
The Dresden University Sports Center (DHSZ) organizes many and varied sports courses for
                        thousands of students and employees of Dresden's universities every semester. The Dresden
                        University Sports Center is a joint central facility for university sports of the TU Dresden as
                        well as the HTW Dresden. The range of sports offered is one of the largest and most diverse in
                        university sports in Germany. Here you can find sports from A like Aerobic Boxing to Z like
                        Zumba. Please refer to the information of the
Dresden University Sports Center
for the current offer.
CULTURAL OFFERS
During the semester the student association
faranto e.V.
offers several events in social, hiking, trips and party. In addition, the
Studentenwerk Dresden Culture Office
promotes the cultural and artistic
                        interests of students.
Student clubs
(Did you know? Dresden has the most student clubs in Germany.)
Aquarium e.V., ›
www.club-aquarium.de
, Wohnheim Petersburger Straße 21, 01069
                            Dresden
Bärenzwinger e.V., ›
www.baerenzwinger.de
, Brühlscher Garten 1, 01067 Dresden
Borsi 34 e.V., ›
www.borsi34.de
, Wohnheim Borsbergstraße 34, 01309 Dresden
Club 11 e.V., ›
www.clubelf.de
, Wohnheim Hochschulstraße 48, 01069 Dresden
Club Countdown e.V. ›
www.countdown-dresden.de
, Güntzstraße 22, 01307 Dresden
Club HängeMathe e.V., ›
www.club-haengemathe.de
, Zeunerstraße 1 f, 01069 Dresden
Club Mensa e.V., ›
www.clubmensa.de
, Mensa Reichenbachstraße 1, 01069 Dresden
Club Novitatis e.V., ›
www.novitatis.de
, Fritz-Löffler-Straße 12/c, 01069 Dresden
Gutzkowclub e.V., ›
www.gutzkow-club.de
, Wohnheim Gutzkowstraße 29 – 33, 01069
                            Dresden
Heinrich-Cotta-Club e.V., ›
www.heinrich-cotta-club.de
, Wohnheim Weißiger
                            Höhe 1, 01737 Tharandt
Kellerklub GAG 18 e.V., ›
www.gag-18.com
, Wohnheim Fritz-Löffler-Straße 16, 01069
                            Dresden
Traumtänzer e.V., ›
www.club-traumtaenzer.de
, Gret-Palucca-Straße 9, 01069 Dresden
Wu5 e.V., ›
www.wu5.de
, August-Bebel-Straße 12, 01219 Dresden
Theater
Saxon State Opera Dresden ›
www.semperoper.de
: The Saxon State Opera Dresden is not only
                            responsible for the world famous Semper Opera House, but it also runs the ”Kleine Szene”,
                            and the chamber music hall of the Semper Opera.
State Operetta Dresden ›
www.staatsoperette.de
: Dresden‘s State Operetta offers operettas,
                            broadway musicals, and rock operas.
Drama ›
www.staatsschauspiel-dresden.de
: The State Theatre shows
                            classical theatre, contemporary pieces, matinées, and musical concerts.
Landesbühnen Sachsen ›
www.dresden-theater.de
: The Landesbühnen Sachsen are based in
                            Radebeul but also maintain the Felsenbühne Rathen in Saxon Switzerland. Theatre plays,
                            concerts, operas, and musicals are staged there throughout the summer.
More Theatres
Boulevardtheater Dresden – ›
www.boulevardtheater.de
Comödie Dresden – ›
www.comoedie-dresden.de
die bühne – ›
www.die-buehne.tu-dresden.de/
Herkuleskeule – ›
www.herkuleskeule.de
St. Pauli Ruine – ›
www.theaterruine.de
Societaetstheater – ›
www.societaetstheater.de
Theaterhaus Rudi – ›
www.rudi-dresden.de
Theater Junge Generation – ›
www.tjg-dresden.de
Theaterkahn – ›
www.theaterkahn-dresden.de
Parties and Festivals
Information regarding events and festivals can be found at ›
www.dresden.de
Museums
Deutsches Hygiene-Museum Dresden ›
www.dhmd.de
: With its interdisciplinary projects the
                            HygieneMuseum deals with essential questions concerning the life sciences. The well-known
                            permanent exhibit features the human body.
Old Masters Picture Gallery ›
https://gemaeldegalerie.skd.museum
/: The
                            collection displayed in the Semper building at the Zwinger comprises masterpieces of 15th to
                            18th century European painting.
New Masters Gallery ›
https://albertinum.skd.museum/
: The gallery at the Albertinum at
                            Brühl’s Terrace exhibits masterpieces of the 19th to 21st century.
Green Vault ›
https://gruenes-gewoelbe.skd.museum/
: The fairytale-like
                            world-known treasure chamber of Augustus the Strong is located in the Historic Green Vault
                            in the Dresden Castle (time-limited, buy in advance). Additionally, the New Green Vault
                            offers the possibility to view more than 1,000 inestimably precious exhibits.
Botanical Garden ›
www.tud.de/bot-garten
: The Botanical Garden of TU Dresden
                            shows around 10,000 kinds of plants from different climate zones and different regions of
                            the world – altogether in an area of 3.25 ha close to Großer Garten.
General Information
Trams and buses within the city are operated by the
Dresden Transport Services (DVB)
, which is
                        part of the wider network
Oberelbe Transport (VVO)
of regional transport
                        providers.
Schedules
and information about the
ticket
                            prices
are provided on their website and at each tram or bus stop.
Navigation
You can find free smartphone apps for public transport in Dresden by searching your app store for
                        "VVO" or "DVB".
For journeys involving
trains
the “DB Navigator” app by Deutsche Bahn
                        is useful to have.
Find here a map
here
.
Semester ticket (Germany semester ticket) from summer semester 2024
DVB trams and buses as well as various S-Bahn and regional trains (Regionalbahn,
                        Regional-Express) connect Dresden and the surrounding area and can be used with the semester
                        ticket (Germany semester ticket).
Scouting SN – especially for international students
To create a level playing field for students when starting their careers, the Career Service
                        offers international students special services and comprehensive advice.
In the new
Projekt Scouting SN,
the Career Service
supports international
                            students in application procedures, job search, the search for internships, and the
                            supervision of final theses in companies
.
The Career Service networks international students with Dresden companies. We accompany the
                        application process with coaching and advice and are also present at the company if necessary.
You find information on the subject of applications and career entry on the career service
                        website and in the e-modules in the opal course of the career service. English workshops
                        you find in the calendar of events.
OPAL:
https://bildungsportal.sachsen.de/opal/auth/RepositoryEntry/5996019714/CourseNode/98693729352546
Career Service Webseite:
https://www.htw-dresden.de/en/studies/career-service
As an international student, your allowed working hours are determined according to the country
                        you came from.
>> ARE YOU FROM THE EU, ICELAND, LIECHTENSTEIN, NORWAY OR
                            SWITZERLAND?
You can work as much as you like, without special permission. But if you wish to work more than
                        20 hours a week, you are required to make insurance contributions, just like German students.
>> AND EVERYONE ELSE?
Students from everywhere else are not allowed to work more than 140 days a year, or 280 half
                        days. To work more, you need special permission from the "Agentur für Arbeit" employment agency
                        and the immigration office Dresden. Permission depends on the unemployment rate where you are
                        living. You also cannot be self-employed.
The following website provides more information on this topic:
https://www.study-in-germany.de/en/germany/everyday-life/work/
First Aid and Medical Care
Having a health insurance is obligatory.  With your health insurance card you can visit the
                        doctor in case of malaise. You can find doctors with knowledge of foreign languages in the
database of
                            the Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians
. You will find a list of all
                        the specialists and can filter for doctors that speak your language. Note that the doctor but
                        not all their staff may speak the respective language. Enter
01069
in the field
                        "PLZ", select
Hausarzt
under "Fachkriterien", and under "Zusatzangaben" in
                        "Fremdsprache" select the desired language skills of the doctor, then click "Arztsuche starten".
                        If no doctor in Dresden speaks your native language, then select
English
.
An overview of hospitals in the city of Dresden can be found on
the website of the city
.
The hospital Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus Dresden offers
Service for International Patients.
For psycho-social counseling the Studentenwerk offers english speaking services. Please find more
                        information
here
. Additionally you can find a list of english
                        speaking therapists
here
.
For usual visits, call the doctor’s office in advance and make an appointment. For some doctors –
                        even for general practitioners – you might get on a pretty long waiting list. So: In urgent
                        cases (if you are really sick), go to the general practitioner when they open in the morning and
                        wait until they treat you.
The doctor gives you prescriptions (Rezept) which you can hand in at the pharmacy to get the
                        right medicine. Some of them have to be paid completely by yourself, for others you just have to
                        add a small fee or they are completely paid by the insurance. During the night, on weekends and
                        holidays there is a
emergency pharmacy service
. Certain pharmacies are open
                        or can be reached by ringing the bell at the door. Since the pharmacy in charge of the emergency
                        service ch-anges, you can either go to any pharmacy in your area, where the current emergency
                        pharmacy is pointed out on the door or find it in the emergency service schedule of
                        pharmacies.
In cases of emergency or urgent/life-threatening illnesses
                            call:
Police: 110
Ambulance/Fire Fighters/Rescue services: 112
Poison control center: +49 361 730 730
Help in case of racist assaults
Germany is rated as a secure country. Yet it reasonable to avoid some places at certain times. In
                        the light of the current "refugee crisis" resentments to strangers augment. We do our best and
                        hope that you feel safe and welcome in Dresden.
Should you become victim of racist assaults
                        anyhow, "Opferberatung der RAA Sachsen" will be on hand with help and advice for you. "Victim
                        consultation of RAA Sachsen" are competent consultants and companions for legal action. They
                        give emotional support and can place you to therapists if needed.
Beratungsstelle RAA Dresden
Bautzner Str. 41, HH
01099 Dresden
Tel.
                        0351 - 8894174
Fax: 0351 - 8049671
e-mail:
opferberatung.dresden(at)raa-sachsen.de
https://www.raa-sachsen.de/
If you need help, are threatened or insulted, please do not heistate to approach us at any time.
The Room of Silence is a free space for all who want to get away from everyday life, find
                        themselves, meditate or even pray. Whether Muslim prayer, Christian worship or silent meditation
                        without any religious background - the room is open to all who are looking for a moment of
                        silence in the everyday hustle and bustle.
The
Room of Silence
is located in the Dresden State and
                        University Library (SLUB), Zellescher Weg 18, 01069 Dresden, Level 0, Room 0.65.
Directions SLUB:
https://www.slub-dresden.de/en/directions
As an exchange student you will automatically be exmatriculated at the end of the semester. You
                        don't have to do anything.
If you are leaving earlier, it is advisable to exmatriculate. To do this, you must submit the
                        completed form to the Student Office during office hours. Exmatriculation automatically ends
                        access to the QIS portal.
After you have written your last examination at HTWD and before your departure back home, please
                        complete the following tasks:
close your German bank account
, if you have one (Deutsche Bank,
                            Commerzbank,…)
return any books
you have borrowed to the university library
return
your
Mensa card
if necessary,
deregister from the German Health Insurance
(AOK, TK,
                            Barmer...) with the deregistration certificate from HTW Dresden and the deregistration
                            certificate from the "Bürgerbüro" (Resident Registration Office Dresden)
de-register from the Citizens' Office Dresden
Please fill in the form “
Formular_Abmeldung_ins_Ausland
”. Unfortunately,
                        the form is only available in German. In the field “Bisherige Wohnung”, you write down when you
                        are moving out (“Tag des Auszugs”) and your address in Dresden. Please cross “alleinige
                        Wohnung”. In the field “Künftige Wohnung - Auslandsanschrift” you write down only your home
                        country. In the field “1” you write down your family name, first name, birth name, gender, date
                        of birth, and country of birth. Sign the form at the bottom. You need to bring the signed form
                        and your passport or ID card to one of the Citizen’s Offices in Dresden.
Please make an
appointment
before visiting a Citizen’s Office:
Online appointment
.
OR
Without appointment
, all Citizen’s Offices will offer the possibility to visit
                        the office
without prior appointment
every
Tuesday and
                            Thursday
between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. You can find the addresses here:
https://www.dresden.de/en/city/anliegen/citizens-offices.php
De-registration is possible at the earliest one week before moving out or within two
                        weeks after moving out.